First of all, the obvious question is how you got involved in professional writing.
Just a little background.
It's one of those terribly long and dull stories and I'll give you the short version as best I can.
When I was a kid I got rheumatic fever.
This was in Cincinnati and I was about 13 years old.
In effect, for something on the order of two years I was out of school.
Basically all I could do to stay relatively sane was to read.
I read everything and anything I could get my hands on.
As I guess is true of something like 90% of all science fiction writers in the world,
I hit Edgar Rice Burroughs because that's about all there was at that time.
It was just fascinated by the Mars books.
I wrote a letter to Burroughs by the way and got an answer back and I still got the letter somewhere.
Because of the addiction to Burroughs, one time when I was in a newsstand I saw a copy of the big old fat amazing stories.
It had a cover story by Burroughs called Tiger Girl.
Also a story by Eando Bender.
You remember him or rather you remember them or El Anato called Adam Link Saves the World.
Anyway, I bought the copy of Amazing because I wanted to read the Burroughs story and I figured I might as well read all this other stuff too.
There was a story in there by Edmund Hamilton called Treasure on Thunder Moon which I read and was immediately hooked.
I thought this was the greatest thing I had ever read, maybe the greatest thing anybody had ever written.
I decided well by golly the thing to be is to be a professional writer and to write science fiction.
I got a second hand portable typewriter and I taught myself to type.
I wrote something every week between the time I was 14 and when I was 21 when I sold my first story.
I sent it all off.
Editors were just immensely helpful.
I never got form rejection slips.
Even at 14 years old you can imagine the kind of junk you were writing at 14.
But people like Sam Merwin for example would write me a little note.
We can't use this but keep trying and so forth.
In effect what really happened was that I got hooked on science fiction.
I just thought science fiction writers must be gods.
I wanted to be one.
I figured that's as close to a god as I could get.
So I went at it and I kept writing until I sold my first story.
I sold every one I've written since.
Did you remade these?
Yes I did.
What was that in particular thesis to it?
Well the deal was that I took an MA degree at the University of Texas under Harry Ranson
whom you may have heard of.
Harry later became chancellor of the UT system.
Harry was not only a marvelous teacher but he was somebody who was open to new ideas
and encouraging students to do the kind of things that they were interested in.
He asked me what I wanted to do since I was more or less committed to doing an MA in English
with a minor in anthropology.
I said what I want to do is I want to write on science fiction.
In particular I want to write on magazine science fiction.
He said okay have at it.
So I did it.
As far as I know, correct me if I'm wrong, I think it was the first academic thesis that was ever written on science fiction
with an emphasis on magazine science fiction.
I talked about Heinlein, Bradbury, people like that.
It's still gathering dust up in the archives of the UT library.
Then why didn't you, I would have expected at that point you'd probably become an English teacher
or a professional writer full time or something like that.
Actually I was briefly.
After I got my MA, I taught English at the University for one year.
There were two troubles that were involved in that situation.
From my point of view, I don't know what troubles the students had.
But the two troubles were basically that by the time I had started to teach English,
I was so much into anthropology that I already knew that that's what I wanted to do.
I really was just teaching the English because I had told ransom I would.
The other aspect of it was there's nothing like teaching freshman English for a year to convince you
that that's not what you want to do for the rest of your life.
That was the end of it.
I left then went to UCLA to graduate school in anthropology.
I know that doesn't answer the question about why I didn't become a full time professional writer.
But I'm not sure I can answer that question.
Tony Batcher once said to me, sooner or later you're going to have to choose.
And I never did.
And I suppose that one reason was that I was particularly at that time when I was, you know,
a hundred years younger than I am now.
I was just as interested in anthropology as I was in writing.
And I really wanted to teach anthropology.
And so I tried to do both doubtless within different success.
How do you divide yourself now?
Are you still the chairman of the department there?
Yeah, I'm not.
I'm not sure that still is the word you want.
Actually, I was chairman of the department of anthropology from 1967 to 1971.
And when I resigned, I swore I would never do it again under any circumstances whatsoever.
And so here I am in the third year of my second chairmanship.
And I figure I've got one year to go and then somebody else is going to take over.
And hopefully I can get back to writing not on a full time basis,
but I can sure write more than I can when I'm tied up with the chairmanship.
It's really a full time job.
Well, I think I know the answer to this.
But let me ask anyhow, is writing a hobby, a love,
or are you just for the monetary aspect?
If you ever had anybody who answered that question by saying,
well, I'm just in it for the money.
Really? Really Jack Van's?
I think he was kidding me.
Yeah, he was kidding me.
No, I really think that writing is something you have to do.
And at any rate, that's the way it is with me.
When I go a certain length of time without writing anything or trying to write something,
I get actually physically uncomfortable.
And it's definitely a labor of love.
I don't think of myself as an anthropologist who occasionally writes a story.
I think that way down deep, wherever it is I really live,
what I am is a writer who got interested in anthropology rather than the other way around.
And it means more to me, I think.
It's more gratifying to me than anything else I do.
I just sold a story to Analog, a story called Ghost Town.
It's going to be out in either the September or October issue.
And I really, you know, I was thrilled when Analog bought it.
And it's almost like I'd never sold a story before.
And it's infinitely more important to me than the other things I do.
Have you purposefully used science fiction to communicate anthropological theory?
To some extent.
But it was certainly nothing that I sat down and planned.
You know, like here's an effective way to teach anthropology that I'm going to do it through science fiction.
I really think that the actual truth of the situation is that any writer writes about the things that they know.
And one of the things that I knew was anthropology.
And so it's more or less natural that a fair amount of my fiction is rooted in anthropology.
But by no means all of it.
And particularly in the shorter fiction, the stories that I like the most, I don't know whether anybody else likes them or not,
tend to be stories that don't have anything to do with anthropology at all.
Although, you know, I don't mean to go on about this unduly and just stop me if I'm rattling on too far.
But anthropology and science fiction frequently ask much the same kinds of questions among them.
What does it mean to be human?
Where have we been?
And where are we going?
And it seems to me that if you're involved seriously in either field, you tend to sort of slop over into the other one.
And I would guess, I don't know whether anybody's ever actually counted it up.
But I suppose something like 50% of my fiction perhaps is rooted directly in anthropology.
But there's 50% that isn't.
Of course, when you read the histories of science fiction and so forth, you're often given credit for being the first one to introduce serious anthropological themes.
So I guess you're still known for it.
Yes. And I suppose I have the, I guess it's a unique distinction of having a science fiction book that was actually reviewed in the American anthropologist.
And that was Shadows and the Sun that was reviewed by Evan Vogue of Harvard when it first came out and made the point that it was the first novel as far as he knew that had used modern science fiction in its construction.
But again, I don't think it was anything deliberate.
It's just that I was personally involved in anthropology at that time.
And so it really would be rather surprising if none of it seeped into the fiction.
Then you'd have a situation where there's no connection at all between the sort of person you are and what you do and what you write.
And that's a bad deal.
Yeah. I thought one probably that to me the book that was most specifically tied to anthropology was Giants in the Dust.
I'm not sure you'd agree with that or not.
But what question I had on that was the, you have Barnum stop agriculture and the domestication of animals at one point in that novel.
That would effectively stop civilization.
Yeah. Yeah.
You're asking why did I do that?
Or and I think I know why, but I'm just.
Well, actually, the funny thing about Giants in the Dust, there are lots of funny things about Giants in the Dust,
including the fact that that's not my title.
And I haven't the faintest idea of what Giants in the Dust means in the context of that particular novel.
I called it go back, go back.
But it's about a kind of anthropology that most people are not familiar with.
You know, almost all the anthropology and science fiction comes out really of the old Franz Boas, Ruth Benedict cultural relativism position.
And there's a whole new school in anthropology, if you can call it a school, and not just an anthropology because it gets into sociobiology and all sorts of things,
which states in effect, you know, that there's more to human beings at birth than just being the traditional tabula rasa that there's some things built in.
And what I was trying to do in Giants in the Dust or what was going on there was really to take the old deal about suppose you took 50 people, 25 male, 25 female,
and you cast them away on the traditional Desert Island.
What would happen to them if they could somehow survive from infancy and grow into adulthood?
And one possibility that hasn't been considered is that we have a kind of culture building device within us and that we would recreate a good deal of culture much more quickly than is usually assumed.
And I was playing around with that idea in Giants in the Dust.
And the reason why Varnum stops these various inventions and things is because he wants to give it time to unfold to see what will happen.
But you may recall Varnum is the only character in the book who retains any memory.
And at the end of the book, he finally decides that ethically the only thing he can do is to tell the other people what he remembers of the culture back on Earth and to give them a fairer shot at what's going on.
So you weren't saying then that we should not have developed civilization?
No, I wasn't. I think you can construct an argument to the effect that people in other kinds of societies, particularly hunting and gathering societies, have some things that we don't have.
It's not all one-sided. Civilization is not an unmixed blessing.
And people who live in those ban type of societies, they tend to be freer from stress.
They tend to have fewer emotional problems than people who live in societies such as our own.
And so I don't think it's a completely insane argument to say, you know, maybe we'd all be better off if we were still hunters and gatherers.
But no, it's not a position I would advocate because I don't think it's a...it's not a realistic proposition outside the world of fantasy.
I'd rather look at it in terms of understanding where we are and how we got to be this way and facing up to the issue that whatever problems we have, we're going to have to learn to live with them.
Okay, another work. I guess this is a fairly recent one. I think it was analogue, meanwhile, back on the reservation.
Yeah. I'm glad somebody read the story.
Oh, yeah, I liked it.
I liked it, too.
I guess, again, to me that was sort of connected to anthropology and the idea that if we have...it's almost like we're splitting into two species.
The spacers and the earthers, I guess. I can't remember the exact terms.
But do you think something like that would happen when we try to call an ice space?
I think it's possible. Really, the genesis of, meanwhile, back on the reservation was twofold.
And one was simply the kind of reaction that builds up in you when everybody talks about, hey, you know, here's the glorious future coming onward to the stars, everybody.
When you stop and realize everybody's not going, and in fact, 99.99% of the human population will live and die on this planet.
And you've got to wonder, well, what about them? Aren't they people, too?
And it's anthropological, I think, primarily in the sense of they're in the same boat that so-called primitive peoples are on this planet today.
That the march of culture, for one of another term, has passed them by to some extent.
And they're sort of islands that are left in the stream and left behind.
And yet they have all the problems of living the face that anybody else does.
And I was just trying to raise the question, well, all right, what about the people who stay behind?
Do we just write them off? Are they ciphers? Or aren't they just as important as somebody that goes off to Alpha Centaurus or someplace?
The other thing that was involved in that story was that I had not written any short fiction in a while.
And I got mixed up with the Turkey City group in Austin, which has been a source of untold joy in my life.
And a number of people who were involved in that group, Lisa Tuttle and Howard Waldrop and a number of others, had urged me to try to do something again,
not wait so long between stories.
And meanwhile, back on the reservations, actually the first story I ever wrote, that I submitted to criticism from other writers.
And I learned a lot from them. And it was a very rewarding experience.
And I can't tell you what a thrill it is for me to be living in some place like Austin and to find a whole colony of professional science fiction writers there.
And not just there, but the fact that they're so good. You know, for something like 20 years, I was all alone in Texas.
The closest thing there was to a science fiction convention or gathering in the old days was when Walt Miller and I got together for a six pack of beer and Kyle.
And this is a brand new experience for me. And it's comparable only to the situation I was in when I was in Los Angeles in graduate school.
And Ray Bradbury and Chuck Beaumont and Bill Nolan and Dick Matheson and all of us would get together and talk about stories.
But we never criticized each other's manuscripts in a more or less formal session like that.
Instead, you know, somebody would write something and if there was somebody they liked, they'd take it and say, hey, look at this, you know, you think I can do anything with it.
And then 20 years more or less by myself, really.
Okay, let me just go on to another one here. I'm not sure of this, but I assume I think I got the impression that the novel The Shores of another Sea was probably based somewhat on your own experiences.
Yes, it was. The Shores of another Sea is at least rooted in the 17 months or so that I spent in Kenya and East Africa when I was on a research job with a people called the Comva.
And some aspects of The Shores of another Sea are real. Some are invented as is true in any fiction. But to be specific, the storm and the rains and the isolation that form a major part of The Shores of another Sea, that all happened.
And I was marooned for a period of some weeks at what was that. I forget what I called it in the novel. I may even have used it as a real name, which was the Derajani Research Station.
And when those rains came down, they simply knocked out all communications. And the thought just occurred to me.
You know, suppose you were going to contact this earth and you had to begin somewhere. Would you really plunk your ship down in the middle of New York City the way they always do?
Or would you try it first in a controllable type of situation where you could deal with small numbers and related species? And wouldn't it be interesting if you started off with some other form of primate like a baboon?
And that's where The Shores of another Sea came from. But if you go back and read the book, or at least if I go back and look at it, what I see are all kinds of detailed memories of what actually happened in Kenya, right down to the level of the pipe tobacco I was smoking there, which was called Sweet Nut and came in a yellow tin and was perfectly awful.
Yeah, that flavor, that personal whatever you want to call texture comes through. I felt that when I was reading it. Somehow you live through part of this yourself.
Oh, I had.
Yeah. I got also the impression that perhaps you were, especially at the end, one night forget the protagonist's name.
I suspect I forget it too, but I'll take a guess, alright? Let's call him Royce Crawford.
Royce, that's good. Royce does not shoot the water. He chooses not to shoot that huge water.
That's right.
But somehow you were speaking of the, let's say the brotherhood of all creatures on this earth, say, and Royce realizes that because of the experiences with aliens, somebody off the earth.
Sure. Sure. The scene in which the would-be hunter finally has a chance to shoot the animal that he's always dreamed about and elects to let it go free.
That's an analog of what is going on in the rest of the book as well, which is you have an opportunity or you encounter aliens.
And if you simply treat them the way one human being, hopefully, might treat another under the best of circumstances, maybe this kind of encounter is going to hold more promise than either a situation where they come out with ray guns blasting.
Or one where there's some involved Machiavellian plot.
The notion that I was really playing around with there was simply maybe the level of communication is going to have to take place on the level of, look, there's some good in us, there's some good in you.
Let's try to find the common ground.
It's one reason I was particularly annoyed with the jacket copy on the shores of another sea.
It seemed to me that what I was trying to say was directly antithetical to what the blurb on the cover says, which, as I remember, has got something like, well, it's killing time for the big cats, you know.
I have a sordid history in publishing of unfortunate experiences with jacket blurbs.
Okay, my favorite work of yours, I think this is probably just a personal choice, obviously, is the Winds of Time.
I don't know why, I think maybe it's the...
I know why, it's because it's about trout fishing.
Yeah, I think it was one of the first books I read where the aliens are just like, well, not almost just like us, they're sympathetic.
And I kept expecting some... Of course I didn't expect it because you started with the aliens.
I don't know, some big difference to show up, some horrible thing, but in fact, Wes becomes one of the aliens, he becomes one of them.
Yeah.
That impressed me, I don't know why, it just got to me. I guess you did that...
Well, I'm delighted that you like the book and there are several things that I would say about it.
The things I like in Winds of Time actually have very little to do with its science-fictional aspects.
I like the description of Lake City because it's a place I'm very fond of.
I like the part that's said in Los Angeles because it's a house that I really lived in.
Things like that, that writers put in their books that are of no interest, whatever, to other people.
But to come back to the point you were talking about.
I've often been criticized as a writer for the very point that you mentioned, actually, that my aliens are not as alien as some other writers.
Aliens are, and if anybody can unscramble the syntax of that sentence, they're welcome to try.
It's really what I think of as the, what do you say to a lobster syndrome?
Contact to me if it's going to be interesting, is going to have to be contact with life forms that are enough like us, so that there's something to say.
If there is that commonality, it would seem to me that it's just as possible that we might be absorbed into their way of looking at things as the other way around.
And the aliens that really interest me, and I'll just come right out and say it, the aliens that interest me are people.
They are people in different guises, people that perhaps look a little different or talk differently or have different backgrounds.
But they have a core in them that we can touch and identify with.
And of course, this gets us back to anthropology, where you have different cultures, different life ways, but underneath their people.
And maybe the major problem on this planet is how do we touch this common core between us?
How do we get past these superficial differences?
And if you really got past the superficial differences and you found that you were fundamentally different, as different as we are from a lobster, for example,
my own guess is that what you would have is not so much conflict, but a total lack of interest on either side.
Who wants to spend eternity with a lobster?
Okay, I don't suppose you actually believe this. I'm sure it was a plot device, but you did have the danger always in the background there.
Not the danger, but I guess throughout the universe, the cultures have been destroying themselves.
And that the aliens thought that maybe the Earth would be a place where it didn't happen.
Yeah, you're back on winds of time, right?
Oh yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
Or you're still on winds of time.
But I mean, that's not a, I imagine you, as an anthropologist, especially, you worry about that. I'm not worried about, think about it.
I think as best I can recall, if you go back and think about the time that the, no pun intended, that the winds of time was being written and the time I was thinking about it,
it's the same problem that we're still afflicted with at the present time and in a way it was more acute than, namely, here we've got nuclear devices.
And we have the power to destroy all life on this planet.
Does it have to happen?
Is there any alternative at all?
And I've been accused of being an unreconstructed optimist, and I suppose there's some element of truth in it.
I like to think of myself as an optimist with my fingers crossed.
But the point that I was trying to make was, given that potential for destruction and assuming that it had happened, not just once, but over and over again,
if you were in that kind of a situation, wouldn't you look for a situation where it had not happened, where we didn't blow ourselves, dismissing, and so see, is there something we can learn from that?
And if I can indulge myself very briefly in one of those, I told you so, comments.
We're still here.
You may have noticed that we're talking this afternoon.
And at the time I wrote The Winds of Tone, there was a rather considerable body of thought to the effect that we could not possibly be here in 1983.
Nonetheless, we are, and I suspect we'll be here 20 years in the future as well.
There was a reference in that novel.
I think it was published, if I remember, in 51.
Imagine you were writing it in the 50s.
I think you're wrong.
Really?
Forgive me.
But if memory serves, and memory often does not serve, Miss Zidane came out in 1952, and that's my first novel.
And then there were several that intervened.
So I would guess that The Winds of Time would be somewhere around 1957.
Okay.
Maybe I'm forgetting it.
If I'm wrong, you know, it's no major matter.
But let's guess 1957.
Well, my question was going to be, I guess it's still a slightly valid, but it seemed to me the aliens, and they took a picture with what sounded like a Polaroid camera.
I'm not sure you even remember this, but they took a picture.
The guy said, I mean, the alien said to the west that it's going to be developed in a minute or something.
Nice word of Polaroid cameras were in existence back then, or you were just...
Quite honestly, I won't lie to you.
I don't remember the scene.
I don't remember whether Polaroid cameras were in existence at the time.
And so the only way I can answer that is to say, I have to pick an answer right.
And so the answer I will pick, and I want to emphasize it is entirely fictional.
What I'm doing now is lying.
The Polaroid camera had not yet been invented, but I predicted it in that novel.
Okay, that's good.
Now, let me see how this is going.
All right.
Okay.
Are we doing okay, by the way, still?
Whatever.
Okay.
The little bit more on your work, the story King of the Hill that you had published in the Again Dangerous Division.
That was a little un-Oliver-like, I guess, that story, the style of it, I'm speaking of.
You mean the mood of it?
The mood, yeah, the tone of it.
The narrator, so forth.
I guess that was done deliberately.
It was, to some extent.
After all, I wrote King of the Hill, specifically, at Harlan Ellison's request for Again Dangerous Visions.
And what he was looking for was not sort of a bland tale of optimism, but something with a cutting edge to it.
And this goes back to what we were talking about earlier in terms of trout fishing.
I was very much filled and sickened by what's happened to all the lovely places on earth that I know that I had spent literally years fishing for trout in the wilderness and seeing it cluttered up with beer cans and trash of all kinds.
And just literally sickened with the whole idea of pollution.
And that's the genesis of King of the Hill.
But I think there's more to it than that.
I think, stylistically and to some extent in terms of mood, it's a reflection, among other things, of the fact that I'm not the same person that I was when I wrote Shadows in the Sun and Mrs. Dawn.
I'm older, things have happened to me.
And I suppose that we all tend to get a slightly more jaundiced viewpoint as we totter on towards senility and some of that creeps into King of the Hill.
I like this story myself, and I'll even go further and say, apart from what might seem to be a somewhat bitter tone, although I don't really look at it that way.
You know, life does go on in King of the Hill.
It's just that it's the raccoons that go on instead of a, apart from the bitter tone of, I think there's some fairly funny stuff in King of the Hill.
And one aspect of my work that nobody ever comments on is the humor in it.
And if I had to go back, you know, if I have to read things, for example, to audiences, I invariably pick something that I think is funny, something that I've written.
Sometimes the audience thinks it's funny, sometimes not.
But it is an aspect of my fiction that hardly anybody ever comments on, maybe with good reason.
But I'm not really all that serious a person when you come into contact.
I don't tend to sit around and pontificate about the fate of the universe.
Do I?
Would you say that the chat is probably the best novel?
Yes.
With one possible exception, which is the Wolf is my brother, which is not science fiction, but it's the only award I've ever run in writing.
And I think it's terribly ironic, the only thing I ever wrote that was not science fiction is the one that won the award.
But chat is in the sun, I suspect, illustrates a kind of truism that you find not only in science fiction, but in American literature in general.
And it is simply that unfortunately, your earliest book tends to be the most powerful thing you've ever write.
It's a sad truth to come up against.
But you run into it so many times that it's difficult to avoid the reality of that situation.
Chat is in the sun was not my first book, but it was my first adult novel.
And that tends to be the time when you say whatever it is that you have to say and you tend to say variations on the same thing from then on.
None of us like to face that.
I know when I first met Dick Matheson, I can compliment him on how much I like born of man and woman.
And it got the same comment back from him, you know, look, I've written a hundred stories since born of man and woman.
That's the only one anybody ever talks about.
But I think we're all stuck with that.
But when we're young, when we're fresh, when we're new, we tend to make the most powerful statement that we make.
And I'm afraid maybe that's true as Chat is in the sun, but I'll keep on trying to prove myself wrong.
Was that, I think in the novel, the town was called Jefferson Springs?
That's correct.
Was that based on a particular town?
Oh, sure.
Jefferson Springs, the title, incidentally, part of it comes from the town in East Texas where my wife was born.
That's Jefferson, Texas.
And part of it is the town that was right down the road from where Jefferson Springs really is.
That was Carisa Springs.
Jefferson Springs is Crystal City, Texas, where I went to high school.
And in terms of the description of the town in the book, I made no effort to disguise it.
That's what I'm talking about.
And I think really one of the best things in Chat is in the sun is the depiction of what life in Texas at that time was like.
That's what I like about it.
Yeah, I respond to that texture too, definitely.
Just sort of an overall big question here.
Oh, a biggie.
In much of your fiction, you tend to show man, say, his destructiveness, the way he can destroy the earth in himself, cultural manipulation of other cultures, things like that.
Some of the bad aspects of civilization.
From an anthropologist's point of view, isn't that all sort of natural?
What else can a species do?
Well, don't you think that there is a kind of romanticism that threads itself through the whole texture of anthropology?
Professional anthropologists don't like to admit this.
But if you don't have a streak of the romantic in you, why would you go off to the ends of the earth and live for years studying a kind of life way that nobody really cares much about?
There is that aspect to it.
I think that studying the whole history of the human animal on this planet, it's difficult to avoid the conclusion that there were periods, there were epochs, there were life ways that were much more satisfying to live in than the kinds of human anthills that we find ourselves embedded in at the present time.
And sure, there's that aspect that civilization adds complexity and there's more to it than that.
The real thread that runs through this conversation is trout fishing.
What do you get out of being by yourself on a trout stream anyway?
It's not catching a fish.
It's certainly not killing a fish.
It's somehow getting out of from under all these layers of things that we're afflicted with in the cities that we live in and getting in touch with our roots as an animal.
And after all, we are animals.
But I have to come back to the statement that even though this is a motif and I'm quite conscious that it runs all through my work, I can't help it.
It's something I emotionally respond to.
Nonetheless, I recognize we can't really go back.
We are stuck with this civilization of ours.
And ultimately the tasks we have before us, we've got to somehow make it work.
Okay, I've got about seven to ten minutes left.
Are you okay?
I'm not sure if you have something to get to at two o'clock.
No, no.
Yeah, I'm fine.
Leave it over.
You're never going to get this in three, five minutes, Seg.
No, I'll probably get this in.
Okay, I will try.
The non-fiction, I'm sorry, non-science fiction work you wrote.
I'm sorry I have not read The Wolf as my brother.
Why did you decide to try Western?
Well, let me say, first of all, I think The Wolf as my brother is by far my best novel.
However one goes about judging the quality of a novel, I think it is the construction of it is better.
I think the writing is better.
I'm more satisfied with it than anything I've ever done.
And as a matter of fact, one of the next books, next novels that I want to write is going to be a kind of Western.
It's going to be about Ben Teane.
I don't know whether you're familiar with Ben Teane or not.
But Ben Teane was one of the survivors of Custer's Last Stand.
And I wanted to try it from that point of view, but I'm not answering your question.
Why did I try it?
One of my fields in anthropology, of course, is the Plains Indians.
I teach course on the Plains Indians.
One of the themes of my science fiction has been contact between one culture and another.
Here's the classic or one of the classic contact situations in anthropology and in history.
The collision between the Plains Indians, in this case the Comanche and the later Americans.
And I think it really would have been rather strange if I had never tried to convert that sort of interest or experience into fiction.
And so I did.
And there's another dimension to it also.
We're back to trap fishing again.
I'm interested in the land and the things that grow on it and the animals that live in it.
And this was one way of getting at it from two different perspectives, really.
It's not just us versus the Comanche, which is, of course, their classic corny idea.
But the two protagonists in that novel and it's constructed in a way that it cuts back and forth between them.
The Indian, whose name is Foxclaw and the Cavalry Officer, whose name is Curtis.
They are both caught up in the same inexorable series of events.
And one of the points I was trying to make in there is that underneath the superficial differences, again, feathers in the hair, brass buttons on your coat or what have you.
Foxclaw and Curtis were very similar kinds of people.
And they thought about things in very much the same way.
And yet they were caught up in a situation where they literally could not communicate.
There's a scene in the book where the Cavalry Officer and the Comanche Indian actually meet.
And when they meet, it suddenly dawns on both of them.
They can't say anything to each other.
One speaks Comanche, one speaks English.
And there is that kind of gulf between them.
And I realize I'm rather far afield from your question.
But if I had to totter off to my grave and just leave one book behind me, that's the one that would be the Wolf was my brother.
You answered about three of my questions with that.
Which do you consider your best work?
But obviously answer that one.
I was going to ask how it relates to your science fiction, but it would because the communication between the Comanche and the Cavalry,
the aliens, animals or aliens.
They're having a conference at a college in California next week, actually.
The conference is called Contact.
And it is literally the relationship between anthropology and science fiction.
And what anthropologists can bring to science fiction writers that they can use in their contact stories.
And of course, when I heard about this, they wrote me a letter and said they forgot to invite me to the conference.
And they belatedly wrote me a letter and said they felt rather as though they had had a celebration honoring the formation of the United States.
And they forgot to ask George Washington.
And after all, you know, I invented this story and I've written a lot of them in next year.
I'll give the equivalent of a kind of guest of honor speech at the contact conference.
This is another weird situation where just as I was alone in Texas as a science fiction writer for so long, you know, Walt Miller was just here for a few years.
I was also alone in anthropology for many years in terms of saying, look, we can use these ideas in lots of ways, even on a kind of a literal level.
If you're going to have a USS Enterprise, you really ought to have an anthropologist on there because what you're doing is encountering different cultures.
And now all of a sudden I find myself in the midst of groups of people who are doing the same thing that I was doing by myself years ago.
And I guess I'd have to say in all honesty that it's kind of gratifying.
It's a lot better than finding out or not finding out that somebody was interested in what you were doing after you're six feet under.
I would have, the only other science fiction writer I can think of offhand who uses anthropology specifically and well in science fiction is Ursula LeWynn.
Can you think of any others?
Well, there are many science fiction writers who have used elements of anthropology in their stories.
Michael Bishop does, for example, Paul Anderson knows a fair amount about anthropology as well.
But I think it's more deeply ingrained in Ursula LeWynn.
And of course the reason is the K in her name stands for Krober, who is one of the deans of American anthropology.
So she's got it coming into her from both directions, so to speak.
What about the changes you've seen in the field since you started writing? Have they been immense or they startled you or is it just about...
I wouldn't say they startled me, but I would say that they have been immense, yes.
I think they've been immense in two different areas.
The most dramatic change perhaps has been in the medium itself, the medium of expression for science fiction.
You have to remember that at the time I began to read and write science fiction, there weren't any science fiction books.
The only science fiction really was in magazines and if it ever came out in book form it was never promoted as science fiction.
It has now totally changed and it has changed not just in terms of moving from magazines to books, but in the whole area of the media.
I've got a son, 15 years old, who saw Star Wars 18 times.
And to him, that's what science fiction is. It's something up there on the screen or it's on a TV set.
And I'm afraid that in the future it is increasingly going to move in that direction that the kind of science fiction that we knew probably will be pretty much of a dead duck.
So it's changed in that regard. The other way it's changed, although perhaps not as much as many people believe, it has changed stylistically, of course.
I think the writers who are writing science fiction now are much better writers than they used to be.
I don't mean they're better science fiction writers necessarily, but they're better writers.
And the thing that constantly amazes me are the younger writers in Austin that I associate with and I've learned so much from.
They're so far ahead of us in terms of where we were at the same age that there's simply no comparison.
So that's the other side of the coin. Maybe we're getting better. Maybe we'll survive in spite of ourselves.
But you don't look at yourself as a dinosaur that's becoming extinct.
No, I hope not. I think that probably it's a mistake to ask any writer to evaluate their own work or their place in the medium or what have you because we all tend to exaggerate how important we are.
But I can tell you for what it's worth that I've written some things that I can go back and read with pleasure and I've written some things that I think are as good as possibly anybody wrote in science fiction.
But I can also tell you that I can go back and read some other things that I did that I just as soon had never been published and I hope nobody ever reads.
But no, I don't think of myself as a dinosaur old, yes, but not a dinosaur.
Thank you.